**Self-Assessment**

Throughout the development of this ePortfolio, I have come to appreciate the malleability of the fundamentals in computer science. While I have received some formal training with applications such as Java and MySQL, during the creation of these three artifacts I repeatedly had to work with something new to me, such as Python and JavaScript. However, by using what I was taught, I could implement core ideas and functionality to these new platforms to create the functionality I desired quickly and easily. For example, I had been taught how to work with MySQL using a command line interface, but for my second artifact I had to figure out how to implement these command line functions in JavaScript. By combining my understanding of MySQL and Java, I was able to make this JavaScript program functional despite having no formal training in the specific language nor having created a program like it in the past. With how the requirements given by each client can vary so drastically, being able to apply the techniques one already knows to a multitude of applications is of utmost importance.

Unfortunately, in my education I received few opportunities to collaborate in a team environment. Despite taking a class entirely on the Agile development workflow and learning about the various team members who must work together to successfully produce a final product, up until now I have worked on projects exclusively by myself. Personally, I think working with a team would be an enjoyable experience, as us team members could ask each other questions and could work together to solve problems rather than having to find solutions online. One area I do have some experience with is explaining topics to stakeholders, as throughout my educations I’ve been tasked with explaining a wide variety of topics to my fellow classmates. Because of this, know how to explain ideas to people who are unfamiliar with a topic and can potentially persuade them to my side of an argument.

Throughout my various classes, I have come to understand the importance and interconnectedness of data structures, algorithms, databases, and security when working in software engineering. Regardless of how simple a piece of software may be, it is almost guaranteed to still require the developer to incorporate various data structures and algorithms to collect, store, modify, and utilize data to produce the desired output of the software. Additionally, if there is a large quantity of data, odds are a database will be used to efficiently store and retrieve that data, which leads to the final point of security. As the internet has grown in use over the past few decades, it has become increasingly important that software utilizes effective security measures to ensure user data is stored securely so that potential attackers can’t steal and use it.

This ePortfolio will demonstrate my understanding of software design and engineering, algorithms and data structures, and databases through two artifacts. The first artifact is an authentication system written in Python in which the user is prompted to enter a username and password. The entered credentials are then compared with credentials that have been securely stored in a separate file. This artifact showcases both software design and engineering as well as algorithms and data structures by being written in the Python language which I hadn’t previously worked with, and by utilizing efficient and effective data structures to store and manipulate data. The second artifact is a JavaScript program created with Node.js that connects to a remotely hosted MySQL server and allows the user to easily create, read, update, or delete tables in a database. This artifact showcases my understanding of databases by utilizing MySQL functions and JavaScript to automate most of the functions a user would have when working with a database.

[Artifact One (Software Design and Engineering)](./ArtifactOne.md)

[Artifact Two (Algorithm and Data Structures)](./ArtifactTwo.md)

[Artifact Three (Databases)](./ArtifactThree.md)
